# The Great Chia Glossary

This guide will act as a glossary for many of the concepts utilised in Chia.
If you are familiar with how Bitcoin transactions work, a lot of this will be familiar.

---

* **Coin (TXO/transaction output)** - A coin stores value. All coins are generated as the output of a transaction or a coinbase reward or fee target. A coin is spent exactly once, allowing its value to go into other coins, and is then permanently destroyed. Each unspent coin is locked with a ChiaLisp program which is that coin’s puzzle, and whoever has the information to solve that puzzle is the person who can spend that coin. The most basic puzzle has a public key and accepts a solution which contains a list of conditions signed by the corresponding private key, so only the owner of the private key can unlock the coin and spend it.

* **Unspent coin (UTXO/unspent transaction output)** - A coin which has been created but not yet spent and hence is storing value.
Unspents (UTXO set/unspent transaction output set) - This is the set of all unspent coins on the network. It is used to check if a transaction is valid, acting as a lookup for the puzzles. It maps a coin ID to a birthdate in blockheight. A transaction must contain a reveal of the information used to calculate the ID in order for it to be possible to validate because the unspents doesn’t contain that information, only hashes which can be used to validate it.

* **Coin ID (TXO ID/transaction output ID)** - The ID of a coin in Chia is generated by hashing the primary input ID, puzzle hash, and amount concatenated in that order. This is very different from Bitcoin which uses much more data to form the TXO ID, restricting what smart contracts are capable of. (See also: [SegWit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SegWit))

* **Primary Input** - When a coin is created the coin that was used as input in the transaction is designated as the primary input. This is used to create the coin ID. If more that one coin is used up as an input in a transaction then one of the coins is designated the primary input, and the others simply reinforce the transaction.

* **Transaction** - A transaction in Chia contains a list of IDs of input coins which must be currently unspent, reveals of how their own primary inputs, puzzle hashes, and amounts, reveals of their puzzles, solutions to those puzzles, and an aggregated signature.

* **ChiaLisp (Bitcoin Script)** - ChiaLisp is the Turing-complete functional language which the puzzles for spending coin are programmed in. (For more information see: CLVM Guide)
Puzzle (Scriptpubkey) - A ChiaLisp program specified by a coin to protect it. A puzzle can either reject a solution or output a set of constraints.

* **Solution (Scriptsig)** - This is the ChiaLisp program which is passed to the puzzle for evaluation when a transaction is submitted. For more information about how transactions work, and how solutions can generate new coins check out this [guide](./part2_transactions.md)

* **CLVM** - The CLVM is the ChiaLisp Virtual Machine which is the sandboxed environment that puzzles and solutions are run in. The CLVM only runs the compiled minimal version of ChiaLisp, though compilers will eventually exist to convert higher level ChiaLisp to the compiled minimal version.

* **Aggregated Signature/AggSig** - Aggregated Signatures allow us to condense multiple signatures into a single aggregated signature, such that if we know a pubkey and value we can verify if it exists inside of the single aggregate. This uses BLS non-interactive aggregation.

* **Prepend Signature** - Prepend signatures are used so that we can retain metadata about the structure of an aggregated signature. TODO: Expand

* **Op Constraints/Conditions** - Constraints are returned by the puzzle when it’s passed the solution. If all of the returned conditions are met then a transaction is valid.

* **CREATE_COIN** - Creates a new output. Specifies a puzzle hash which locks up any funds associated with that id. Also specifies an amount for the new coin.

* **ASSERT_MY_COIN_ID** - Specifies the id of the puzzle being run.

* **INPUT** - Specifies an input id which must be spent in this transaction. It may also optionally specify a min_age which must be greater than the time since the input id was created.

* **ASSERT_MIN_TIME** - Gives a block height which this transaction is not valid before.

* **AGG_SIG** - Gives a public key and a value hash which must be included in the aggregated signature for this transaction.

* **Wallet** - Software written to interact with transactions. Chia uses Hierarchical Deterministic Wallets (HD Wallets). This means that they can generate many different public keys that are all valid and verifiable as unique to that wallet. A wallet contains a coin if it possesses the information necessary to unlock that coin and create a transaction which spends it.

* **Covenants** - The ability for a coin to impose rules about its future uses.
